---
title: 'Test'
date: 2005-07-23
permalink: /posts/2005/07/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - test
---

<head>
    <script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
        MathJax.Hub.Config({
            tex2jax: {
            skipTags: ['script', 'noscript', 'style', 'textarea', 'pre'],
            inlineMath: [['$','$']]
            }
        });
    </script>
</head>

Test.

**Borsuk-Ulam.** Let $f:S^n\to\mathbb{R}^{n}$ smooth. Then $\exists x\in S^n$ such that $f(x)=f(-x)$.

 ------

 **Proof:**

Suppose not, then $g(x)=f(x)-f(-x)$ is an odd function that doesn't vanish, let $\widetilde{g}:S^n\to\mathbb{R}^{n+1},\widetilde{g}=g\times 0$, then $\widetilde{g}$ is odd and $\widetilde{g}(x)\neq 0$.
		
\fbox{Claim.} $\text{wind}(\widetilde{g},0)$ is odd (odd map has odd degree).
		
Assuming the claim, $\text{wind}(\widetilde{g},0)=\deg\left(\displaystyle\frac{\widetilde{g}}{||\widetilde{g}||}\right)$ is odd, but $(0,\dots,0,1)\notin \displaystyle\frac{\widetilde{g}}{||\widetilde{g}||}\left(S^n\right)$, so $\deg\left(\displaystyle\frac{\widetilde{g}}{||\widetilde{g}||}\right)=0$, contradiction.
		
Now we prove the claim by induction.

* $n=1:$ $\widetilde{g}:S^1\to \mathbb{R}^{2}\backslash\left\{0\right\}$, $\widetilde{g}$ is odd, then $h=\displaystyle\frac{\widetilde{g}}{||\widetilde{g}||}:S^1\to S^1$ is odd. Then $h$ can be lifted to a map $\overline{h}:\mathbb{R}\to \mathbb{R}$ s.t. $\overline{h}(t+2\pi)=\overline{h}(t)+2\pi k$, for some $k\in\mathbb{Z}$. Since $h$ is odd, then $\overline{h}(t+\pi)=\overline{h}(t)+\pi k$, where $k$ is odd. Moreover $\deg h=k$, so $\text{wind}(\widetilde{g},0)$ is odd.

* Now suppose that every odd map $S^{n-1}\to \mathbb{R}^{n}\backslash\left\{0\right\}$ has odd winding number w.r.t. $0$. Let $g:S^n\to \mathbb{R}^{n+1}\backslash\left\{0\right\}$ odd, let $S^{n-1}\subseteq S^n$ be the equator and let $h=g|_{S^{n-1}}$. Fix $a\in S^n$ be a regular value of $\displaystyle\frac{g}{||g||}$ and $\displaystyle\frac{h}{||h||}$, then $-a$ is also a regular value of both of them. Hence $g$ and $h$ intersect the line $\ell=\mathbb{R}\cdot a$ transversely. Moreover, $h(S^{n-1})\cap \ell=\emptyset$. Now $\text{wind}(g,0)=\deg\left(\frac{g}{||g||}\right)=\#\left(\frac{g}{||g||}\right)^{-1}(a)=\frac{1}{2}\# g^{-1}(\ell)=I(g_{+},\ell)$ where $g_{+}=g|_{D}$, $D$ is the upper semisphere. Let $pr:\mathbb{R}^{n+1}\to \ell^{\perp}$, $0$ is a regular value of $pr\circ g_{+}$ because $g_{+}\pitchfork \ell$. And $\left(pr\circ g_{+}\right)^{-1}(0)=g_{+}^{-1}(\ell)$. Moreover, $pr\circ g_{+}|_{\partial D}$ is an odd function. Therefore $$\text{wind}(g,0)=I(g_{+},\ell)=I(pr\circ g_{+},0)=\text{wind}(pr\circ g_{+}|_{\partial D},0)$$ is odd by induction.

